Perhaps one of the most famous
uses of conditional probability is
so-called Bayes' rule.
This rule is named after a Presbyterian
minister named Thomas Bayes who had his
work published posthumously.
Bayes' rule allows us to reverse
the role of the conditioning set and
the set that we want the probability of.
So imagine in the event that we
want the probability of b given a.
When we have, or can easily calculate
the probability of a given b.
Well Bayes' rule says you can do that.
You can evaluate b given a to a given b.
But you need some other information.
You need the probability
of b marginalized over a.
And this is quite useful in
the sense of diagnostic test.
And we'll go over some
examples here in a minute.
So, let's talk about conditional
probability in the context of
diagnostic test.
One of the most important examples of
conditional probability and Bayes' Rule.
Let's let plus and
minus be the events of the, be the event
that the test is positive or negative.
Let's think of a test for a disease.
So plus being that the test says
the person has the disease, and
minus being that, saying that they don't.
And then let's D and D complement be
the event that the person either does or
does not have the dis,
disease, respectively.
Then the sensitivity is the probability
that the test is positive given that
the subject actually has the disease.
This would be a marker of a good test.
You would want the sensitive,
sensitivity to be high.
The specificity is
the probability that the test is
negative given that the subject
does not have the disease.
Probability minus given D complement.
Again, you want the specificity
to be high for a test to be good.
And notice in the development
of diagnostic test,
these things are at least
conceptually obtainable.
There is, of course, a lot of difficulties
in finding good sensitivity and
specificity estimates.
But for example, in an HIV blood test,
you could take people who you
know to have the disease and
apply the diagnostic test to that blood.
You could also take people who you knew
for sure did not have the disease.
And you could apply the diagnostic
test to the blood sample,
blood samples from those subjects.
If you happen to have a positive test,
the number that is most of
concern to you is the probability of
having disease given that positive test,
the so-called positive predictor value.
If you have a negative test,
your interested in the probability of not
having the disease,
given that negative test.
The so called negative predictive value.
We might say in the absence of a test,
we might say the probability of
having the disease is the so
called prevalence of the disease.
Let's go through an example.
A study comparing the efficacy of HIV test
reports on an experiment which concluded
that the antibody tests have a sensitivity
of 99.7 and a specificity of 98.5.
So these are kind of made up numbers.
So don't think of these as cardinal
truths about antibody test for HIV.
Suppose that a subject from a population
with a 0.1% prevalence of HIV
receives a positive test result.
What is the associated
positive predictive value?
So mathematically, we want the probability
of disease, given a positive test result,
given the sensitivity and the specificity
and the prevalence, P of D, 0.001.
So let's plug directly into Bayes' rule.
We want probability of disease
given a positive test result.
That's the probability of the positive
test result, given disease,
times the probability of disease,
divided by this denominator right here.
And again, it's not immediately
clear where the numbers from
the problem are coming from here.
But let's just note that the probability
of a positive test result,
given that the person does not have
the disease, is 1 minus the probability of
a negative test result given that
the person does not have the disease or
that's 1 minus the specificity.
And the probability of disease complement
is 1 minus the probability of disease.
Now we've rewritten it only in
terms of things that we know.
And we can just plug in the numbers and
get 6% as our probability.
So in this population,
a positive test result only res,
suggests a 6% probability that
the subject has the disease.
So in other words, the positive
predictive value is 6% for this test.
The low positive predictor value
in this case is largely due to
the low prevalence of the disease.
However, imagine in the process of
counselling this person about their
positive test result,
the counselor learned that
the subject was an intravenous drug
user that routinely had intercourse
with an HIV infected partner.
They would assume that the,
the relevant prevalence for
this person was much higher, and thus the
positive predictor value is much higher.
I want to now distinguish
between the component that is
dependent on this prevalence and
the component that is what I
would describe as the objective evidence
of the positive test result, and
that's what the diagnostic likely ratios
are, and that's what we'll cover next.
Here I just give the formula for
the positive predictive value again
as it's plugged into Bayes' rule.
And remember, this formula then
only depends on the sensitivity,
1 minus the specificity in
the prevalence of disease.
We can do the exact same thing for
1 minus this probability.
One minus the positive predicted value,
which is the probability of not having
the disease given a positive test result,
and you get this formula to the right.
Notice that the denominator is identical
in either of the two probabilities.
And the numerator changes.
So if we were to divide these two
equations, we get the following.
The probability of disease given
a positive test result divided by
the probability of not having the disease
given a positive test result.
Whenever you take a probability and
divide it by 1 minus that probability,
you get the so called odds.
So here on the leftmost side,
we have the odds of disease given
a positive test result, and
on the rightmost side, we have the odds of
disease in the absence of the test result.
Here this factor in the middle is
the diagnostic likelihood ratio of
a positive test result.
So the equation is,
the pretest odds of disease
times the diagnostic likelihood ratio,
equals the post-test odds of disease.
So in other words, the diagnostic
likelihood ratio of a positive test
result is the factor by which you
multiply your odds in the presence of
a positive test to obtain
your post-test odds.
So let's go through our example.
Suppose that subject has
a positive HIV test.
If we calculate using our sensitivity and
specificity from before, the diagnostic
likelihood ratio works out to be 0.997,
divided by 1 minus 0.985,
which works out to be 66.
In other words,
no matter what your pre-test odds are,
you multiply them times 66 to
obtain your post-test odds.
Or in other words,
the hypothesis of disease is 66
times more supported by the data
than the hypothesis of no disease.
Now, if the pretest odds are very small,
then still multiplying by
66 will result in a still small number,
though 66 times larger.
Let's just very quickly go over
an incidence when a subject has
a negative test result
in using the DLR minus.
So, in this case,
the DLR minus from the sensitivity and
specificity given before is 0.003.
So, therefore, your post-test
odds of disease in the light of
a negative test result is now 0.3% that
of the pre-test odds of the te, disease.
Or in other words, the hypothesis of
disease is supported 0.003 times that of
the hypothesis of the absence of
disease given the negative test result.